🧲 2D Physics Engine in Java
A fully custom-built 2D Physics Engine written in Java that simulates real-time physical interactions between multiple geometric shapes. Designed from the ground up without any third-party physics libraries, this project demonstrates a deep understanding of classical mechanics, computational geometry, and object-oriented software design.

🔍 Overview
This engine models the physical world in two dimensions — objects have mass, velocity, acceleration, and rotational properties, and they interact with each other and their environment in physically accurate ways. The simulation runs in real time with a customizable GUI that lets users spawn shapes, tweak physics parameters, and watch the engine respond instantly.

⚙️ Core Features
🏃 Rigid Body Dynamics

Every shape is treated as a rigid body with properties like mass, moment of inertia, linear velocity, angular velocity, torque, and restitution.
Motion is governed by Newton's Second Law — forces applied to bodies produce proportional accelerations.
Rotational dynamics are fully supported — objects spin realistically when force is applied off-center.

💥 Collision Detection

Broad Phase — uses Axis-Aligned Bounding Boxes (AABB) to quickly eliminate non-colliding pairs before expensive checks.
Narrow Phase — uses the Separating Axis Theorem (SAT) for pixel-accurate detection between convex polygons and circles.
Supports simultaneous multi-body collision detection across all active shapes in the scene.

⚡ Collision Response

Resolves collisions using impulse-based collision response, computing the exact impulse needed to separate overlapping bodies.
Handles both elastic (bouncy) and inelastic (sticky) collisions via a configurable coefficient of restitution.
Applies friction forces at contact points for realistic sliding and resting behaviour.

🔄 Simulation Loop

Runs on a fixed timestep loop decoupled from the render frame rate, ensuring physics consistency regardless of machine speed.
Integrates motion using Semi-implicit Euler / Verlet integration for numerical stability over long simulations.
Handles resting contact to prevent objects from sinking into each other under gravity.

🖥️ Customizable GUI

Built with Java Swing / JavaFX for a smooth, interactive interface.
Users can spawn shapes (circles, rectangles, polygons) with a click.
Real-time sliders and controls to adjust gravity, friction, restitution, and timestep.
Shapes can be dragged, thrown, and repositioned mid-simulation.
Visual debug overlays show velocity vectors, collision normals, and bounding boxes.


🛠️ Tech Stack
LayerTechnologyLanguageJavaGUIJava Swing / JavaFXPhysicsCustom-built engineMathLinear algebra, vector mathParadigmObject-Oriented ProgrammingBuild ToolMaven / Gradle

📐 Architecture
PhysicsEngine
├── World          — manages all bodies, forces, and the simulation loop
├── RigidBody      — represents a physical object with mass, velocity, shape
├── Shape          — Circle, Rectangle, Polygon with SAT support
├── CollisionDetector  — broad phase (AABB) + narrow phase (SAT)
├── CollisionResolver  — impulse-based response, friction, restitution
├── Integrator     — Euler/Verlet timestep integration
└── GUI            — Swing/JavaFX renderer and user controls

🚀 Getting Started
bashgit clone https://github.com/yourusername/2d-physics-engine.git
cd 2d-physics-engine
mvn compile
mvn exec:java -Dexec.mainClass="com.physics.Main"

🎯 What I Learned

How real-world physics translates into mathematical models and code
The complexity of stable numerical integration and why fixed timesteps matter
How SAT works for convex shape collision detection
Impulse resolution mathematics for realistic collision response
Building a render loop decoupled from a physics loop


📌 Future Improvements

Soft body / spring-joint simulation
Broad phase spatial hashing for large-scale scenes
3D extension
Export simulation as video/GIF
